When a Google product manager showed me
Smart Bidding Exploration in Mountain
View, that product manager called it the
biggest smart bidding update ever. And
honestly, I actually think she might be
right. I was invited by Jenny Marvin as
a one group of 15 PBC influencers uh to
sit down with product managers to
discuss the new features amongst other
things. And after several months of
working with Smart Bidding Exploration,
we can now draw some meaningful
conclusions about its optimal
implementation. So today we'll go
through the key differences between just
lowering your ROS target and enabling
smart bidding exploration. How to
analyze the impact of smart bidding
exploration, when to implement it, and
how to effectively actually use it.
Now let's start with the key difference
between smart bidding exploration versus
just lowering your ROAS. So when you're
lowering your row, so when you change
the target, what you basically do is
that you're increasing all your bids to
try to get more volume. What smart
bidding is trying to do is trying to
explore for new queries. So it looks at
how much row headroom do you have. So it
looks at between what is the row target
you have and what's your actual row. The
more headroom there is between these two
metrics, the more smart bidding we'll
try to explore. Now, we used to have to
lower our ROS target to trigger an
exploration mode. However, with smart
bidding exploration, we can tell it
don't increase the bids for our existing
auctions. All the existing search query
categories that we're in, don't increase
the bids there. However, go in and
increase the bids for new queries to use
10% 20%, 30% of the budget or not the
budget of the rowers that technically
result in the budget, but take that and
go spend it in finding new queries. Now,
when you're implementing smart bidding
exploration, it means that it will lower
your total rows from the campaign or bid
strategy that you're enabling in it.
Again, you can set it to 10%, 20% or
30%. So, if you used to hit 500% rorowaz
with a $10,000 spend, then now you're
going to hit 450% rorowas. Now, you're
going to hit 350% rorowas after you
implement 10 or 30% smart bidding
exploration. Now, it's not obviously the
new queries are are expected to hit
something. We're supposed to get some
additional conversion value out of it
and there's not like a linear drop and
typically this works pretty well. But
just be prepared that it can happen that
you get absolutely nothing out of new
search queries. So make sure that you
pick a smart bidding exploration
percentage that you can afford to let
run for 2 to 3 weeks. It's not worth
setting up smart bidding exploration if
you're going to freak out after 3 days
because you're overly aggressive and
like a just go crazy. Go find new
queries and you apply 30%. The higher
your target, the more impact you'll get
from 10 from a 10% adjustment. I have
run 10% and I've actually gotten pretty
good results from it. Overall, maybe 10%
is not going to do that much, but don't
think of it as when you used to change
targets. When you used to change a
target by 10%, not a lot happens because
some of the new ROS headroom goes to
increasing bids for existing queries.
That's why when you enable smart bending
exploration with only a 10% adjustment,
that means that it can in effect hit a
10% lower row and use that entire new
part of the budget or row headroom to go
chase new queries. And that's why it's
super powerful. Now, there are a couple
of different ways to implement it. One
way is to go in just go into your search
campaign settings, go into your bidding,
and then see smart bidding exploration.
And this is where you can click it. And
then you can say 10 20 30. You can even
put 17 if you want to. Now it says it
specifically your effective target ROS
is 430%. It's really nice that they're
showing this. I love it. The second
place and the place that I will usually
make these changes is within my our
portfolio bid strategies. So again in
your search structure you can go in and
you can go down to settings click on
advanced option. No click on allow smart
bidding. And then we have the same
thing. It's really really cool. and it
works really really well. Now let me
show you how to analyze it. So let me go
in let me take over the summer because
this is where was a case where we went
in and we implemented smart bidding
expiration over the summer. So the green
portion is when we actually had smart
bidding expiration applied and this is
one of the cool things. So I'm just
going to lower it to the per time period
that actually matters. whenever we start
a new account whenever we get into a
high season right before we will lower
our target rows because we I don't want
to just depend on smart bidding
exploration and also was quite new. So I
wanted to make sure that we try to lower
our rose target and we did. And the idea
is that you then go in and say traffic
diversity and you say okay how many
unique search categories with clicks. I
like clicks conversions can be not that
much data but clicks is where we see
okay how much further out does it get
and you can see as we implement the
smart bidding exploration and we lower
the rose target it actually starts decre
start increasing from around 839 search
categories with clicks to up to 1,400.
That's great. Now, it's also going to do
this during peak season by itself. So,
take that with a grain of salt. But this
basically proves that it works. Now,
what we do during a peak season is that
we lower the rose target and then we
start increasing it as we get towards
the end of the peak because then we want
to make sure we we don't there's not
that much exploration happening towards
the ends. We just want to get some more.
And in this case, we had explorations
turned on anyways. So as you can see as
we do this and as you can see before it
continues to actually have even if we as
we increase the target rows it increases
the unique search categories with
clicks. So that was nice. It does what
it's supposed to do as we remove it. You
can see we also increase the target
rows. We remove it and you can see that
the new search queries go down to the
same level as before the peak and that's
what to be expected and it doesn't work
anymore. Even as we're actually we got a
little bit too high on the row target as
we went out of peak but then even as
we're actually having decent row target
compared to before is still remaining
low because we have not enabled smart
bidding exploration. Again, this
analysis is actually also doable in
accounts where you don't have the
ability to run smart bidding exploration
or when you haven't done it. So, if you
just go into the last 30 days, you can
even here see how smart bidding
exploration is doing with unique search
categories. And it's amaz I love this
thing. It explains so many things when I
look at it. So, just this addition as at
least to smart bidding reporting is
amazing. Now, when it comes to timing
for when to implement smart bidding
exploration, I believe that it should be
done strategically throughout the year
on three main occasions. Number one,
when peak season starts. That's what I
just showed you. I think it's number one
thing you're supposed to do is right
before peak season or when peak season
starts, launch your smart bidding
exploration 10 or 20% like you can see
before just with a 10% smart bidding
exploration, which are pretty big
effect. The second one is during a big
sale. It's not something I've tried that
much, so I can't be 100% consistent
saying that it will always work, but
it's something that I just theoretically
think can work. And the four times I've
tried it so far, it's been really really
successful. So, I think it works. If you
are the kind of business that are that
are adding new categories and constantly
changing things in your account, I think
you can basically use it three to six
times throughout the year. That doesn't
have to be that strategic, but just try
to teach smart bidding that there are
new queries out there. It's especially
powerful is if you h have a pretty high
row target so you don't get a lot of
exploration throughout the year and then
you tell it go explore then it will be
powerful because what we're basically
telling smart bing is go explore to find
new queries that we don't bid for today.
There's a couple things that we don't a
couple scenarios where we don't use
smart bidding exploration where I think
you shouldn't do it. If you have 90%
plus impression share, you should
probably not use it. There's probably
not that many more queries to to attack.
The second thing, if you have
consistently low row targets, then
Google smart bidding is already
exploring and is usually not needed to
run smart bidding exploration.
Obviously, if you have no more budget to
spend, if you have no more budget to
spend, then it's a really bad idea. Now,
there's still a couple different things.
Again, low season after sale, etc. But
there are times where your performance
is low anyways due to the market you're
in. Think diet supplements in December
or swimwear in September. Like it will
not solve a low demand problem in
general. So when it comes to strategy
and implementation best practices, I
like to use it in short bursts. Think of
smart bidding exploration as a sprint,
not a marathon. Make sure you have a
clear time frame. Run it 2 to 3 weeks
minimum, but don't leave it on past 6
weeks. Tie it back to a timing section.
align burst with the peak season with a
sale with a product launch or when
you've been running for quite a while at
the same ROS target. The second thing is
make sure that there is a budget
freedom. If you don't have the budget
headroom, then you might just be able to
trigger that same exploration phase by
simply increasing the budget and you
don't need smart bidding exploration. My
second note is that if you don't have
any additional budget, you might not be
able to take advantage of the new search
cur. That's why I'm saying make sure you
have budget freedom. Another
implementation thing is when it comes to
portfolios versus campaigns. You can
strategically choose campaigns with
broad match or other things when it
comes like that and say okay explore
more here. I like portfolios. It joins
everything together. So I I would just
typically recommend always do it with
portfolios. The fourth thing I want you
to do is just be careful with layering
adjustments. So you can for instance if
you have smart already running new
customer acquisition where you add
another 10 or 20% to the customer value
and you maybe also have some value rules
running and you add smart bidding
exploration on top of that it might be
impossible to know what you're actually
targeting. So be careful when you start
layering adjustments. It was something
we learned back in the day when we would
layer location adjustments with audience
adjustments with uh device bidding
adjustments. All of a sudden it start
getting really confusing. So careful
with layering smart bidding exploration
with new customers, with value rules,
etc. Number five is stick to the test.
Don't judge it too early. It's just like
if you did this manually. Smart bidding
has to kiss a lot of frogs in order to
find its prince or princess, no matter
what you're what you're what you're for.
So just be careful. Stick to the test.
Make sure like, okay, if it finds 10 new
search categories you're supposed to be
in and three of them might convert, then
those seven will get thrown away after a
while. Especially when you remove Smart
Bidding Exploration, again, it will
stick to the to the categories that
actually got conversions. So, in the
end, was she right? I'd say Smart
Bidding Exploration really is the
biggest addition that we've seen to
smart bidding in the last 10 years. Try
it out. You won't regret it.